CLASS IX
There will be one paper of two hours duration
carrying 80 marks and Internal Assessment of
practical work carrying 20 marks.
Note: Unless otherwise specified, only SI Units are to
be used while teaching and learning, as well as for
answering questions.
1. Measurements and Experimentation
(i) International System of Units, the required
SI units with correct symbols are given at
the end of this syllabus. Other commonly
used system of units - fps and cgs.
(ii) Measurements using common instruments,
Vernier callipers and micro-metre screw
gauge for length, and simple pendulum for
time.
Measurement of length using, Vernier
callipers and micro-metre screw gauge.
Decreasing least-count leads to an increase in
accuracy; least-count (LC) of Vernier
callipers and screw gauge), zero error (basic
idea), (no numerical problems on callipers
and screw gauge), simple pendulum; time
period, frequency, graph of length l versus T2
only; slope of the graph. Formula T=2.π. g
l
[no derivation]. Only simple numerical
problems.
2. Motion in One Dimension
Scalar and vector quantities, distance, speed,
velocity, acceleration; graphs of distance-time and
speed-time; equations of uniformly accelerated
motion with derivations.
Examples of Scalar and vector quantities only,
rest and motion in one dimension; distance and
displacement; speed and velocity; acceleration
and retardation; distance-time and velocity-time
graphs; meaning of slope of the graphs; [Nonuniform acceleration excluded].
Equations to be derived: v = u + at;
S = ut + ½at2; S = ½(u+v)t; v2 = u2 + 2aS.
[Equation for Sn
th is not included].
Simple numerical problems.
3. Laws of Motion
(i) Contact and non-contact forces; cgs & SI units.
Examples of contact forces (frictional force,
normal reaction force, tension force as
applied through strings and force exerted
during collision) and non-contact forces
(gravitational, electric and magnetic).
General properties of non-contact forces. cgs
and SI units of force and their relation with
Gravitational units.
(ii) Newton’s First Law of Motion (qualitative
discussion) introduction of the idea of inertia,
mass and force.
Newton's first law; statement and qualitative
discussion; definitions of inertia and force
from first law, examples of inertia as
illustration of first law. (Inertial mass not
included).
(iii)Newton’s Second Law of Motion (including
F=ma); weight and mass.
Detailed study of the second law. Linear
momentum, p = mv; change in momentum ∆p
99
= ∆(mv) = m∆v for mass remaining constant,
rate of change of momentum;
∆ p/∆ t = m∆v /∆t = ma or
= ma }
t
m( v - u ) = t
mv - mu = t
p - p { 2 1
;
Simple numerical problems combining
F = ∆p /∆t = ma and equations of motion.
Units of force - only cgs and SI.
(iv) Newton’s Third Law of Motion (qualitative
discussion only); simple examples.
Statement with qualitative discussion;
examples of action - reaction pairs, (FBA and
FAB); action and reaction always act on
different bodies.
(v) Gravitation
Universal Law of Gravitation. (Statement and
equation) and its importance. Gravity,
acceleration due to gravity, free fall. Weight
and mass, Weight as force of gravity
comparison of mass and weight; gravitational
units of force, (Simple numerical problems),
(problems on variation of gravity excluded)
4. Fluids
(i) Change of pressure with depth (including the
formula p=hρg); Transmission of pressure in
liquids; atmospheric pressure.
Thrust and Pressure and their units; pressure
exerted by a liquid column p = hρg; simple
daily life examples, (i) broadness of the base
of a dam, (ii) Diver’s suit etc. some
consequences of p = hρg; transmission of
pressure in liquids; Pascal's law; examples;
atmospheric pressure; common manifestation
and consequences. Variations of pressure
with altitude, (qualitative only); applications
such as weather forecasting and altimeter.
(Simple numerical problems)
(ii) Buoyancy, Archimedes’ Principle; floatation;
relationship with density; relative density;
determination of relative density of a solid.
Buoyancy, upthrust (FB); definition; different
cases, FB>, = or < weight W of the body
immersed; characteristic properties of
upthrust; Archimedes’ principle; explanation
of cases where bodies with density ρ >, = or
< the density ρ' of the fluid in which it is
immersed.
Relative Density (RD) and Archimedes’
principle. Experimental determination of RD
of a solid and liquid denser than water.
Floatation: principle of floatation; relation
between the density of a floating body, density
of the liquid in which it is floating and the
fraction of volume of the body immersed;
(ρ1/ρ2 = V2/V1); apparent weight of floating
object; application to ship, submarine,
iceberg, balloons, etc.
Simple numerical problems involving
Archimedes’ principle, buoyancy and
floatation.
5. Heat and Energy
(i) Concepts of heat and temperature.
Heat as energy, SI unit – joule,
1 cal = 4.186 J exactly.
(ii) Anomalous expansion of water; graphs
showing variation of volume and density of
water with temperature in the 0 to 10 0
C
range. Hope’s experiment and consequences
of Anomalous expansion.
(iii)Energy flow and its importance:
Understanding the flow of energy as Linear
and linking it with the laws of
Thermodynamics- ‘Energy is neither created
nor destroyed’ and ‘No Energy transfer is
100% efficient.
 (iv) Energy sources.
Solar, wind, water and nuclear energy (only
qualitative discussion of steps to produce
electricity). Renewable versus non-renewable
sources (elementary ideas with example).
Renewable energy: biogas, solar energy,
wind energy, energy from falling of water,
run-of-the river schemes, energy from waste,
tidal energy, etc. Issues of economic viability
and ability to meet demands.
Non-renewable energy – coal, oil, natural
gas. Inequitable use of energy in urban and
rural areas. Use of hydro electrical powers
for light and tube wells.
100
(v) Global warming and Green House effect:
Meaning, causes and impact on the life on
earth. Projections for the future; what needs
to be done.
 Energy degradation – meaning and examples.
6. Light
(i) Reflection of light; images formed by a pair of
parallel and perpendicular plane mirrors;
Laws of reflection; experimental verification;
characteristics of images formed in a pair of
mirrors, (a) parallel and (b) perpendicular to
each other; uses of plane mirrors.
(ii) Spherical mirrors; characteristics of image
formed by these mirrors. Uses of concave and
convex mirrors. (Only simple direct ray
diagrams are required).
Brief introduction to spherical mirrors -
concave and convex mirrors, centre and
radius of curvature, pole and principal axis,
focus and focal length; location of images
from ray diagram for various positions of a
small linear object on the principal axis of
concave and convex mirrors; characteristics
of images.
f = R/2 (without proof); sign convention and
direct numerical problems using the mirror
formulae are included. (Derivation of
formulae not required)
Uses of spherical mirrors.
Scale drawing or graphical representation of
ray diagrams not required.
7. Sound
(i) Nature of Sound waves. Requirement of a
medium for sound waves to travel;
propagation and speed in different media;
comparison with speed of light.
Sound propagation, terms – frequency (f),
wavelength (λ), velocity (V), relation V = fλ.
(Simple numerical problems) effect of different
factors on the speed of sound; comparison of
speed of sound with speed of light;
consequences of the large difference in these
speeds in air; thunder and lightning.
(ii) Infrasonic, sonic, ultrasonic frequencies and
their applications.
 Elementary ideas and simple applications
only. Difference between ultrasonic and
supersonic.
8. Electricity and Magnetism
(i) Simple electric circuit using an electric cell
and a bulb to introduce the idea of current
(including its relationship to charge); potential
difference; insulators and conductors; closed
and open circuits; direction of current
(electron flow and conventional)
Current Electricity: brief introduction of
sources of direct current - cells, accumulators
(construction, working and equations
excluded); Electric current as the rate of flow
of electric charge (direction of current -
conventional and electronic), symbols used in
circuit diagrams. Detection of current by
Galvanometer or ammeter (functioning of the
meters not to be introduced). Idea of electric
circuit by using cell, key, resistance
wire/resistance box/rheostat, qualitatively.;
elementary idea about work done in
transferring charge through a conductor
wire; potential difference V = W/q.
(No derivation of formula) simple numerical
problems.
Social initiatives: Improving efficiency of
existing technologies and introducing new
eco-friendly technologies. Creating
awareness and building trends of sensitive use
of resources and products, e.g. reduced use of
electricity.
(ii) Induced magnetism, Magnetic field of earth.
Neutral points in magnetic fields.
Magnetism: magnetism induced by bar
magnets on magnetic materials; induction
precedes attraction; lines of magnetic field
and their properties; evidences of existence of
earth’s magnetic field, magnetic compass.
Uniform magnetic field of earth and nonuniform field of a bar magnet placed along
magnetic north-south; neutral point;
properties of magnetic field lines.
(iii)Introduction of electromagnet and its uses.
Self-explanatory.
